FMRI PREPROCESSING
(CHECK FSL LECTURE 20 NOV 10 2023)
DATA INITIAL QUALITY CHECK
check the database consistency of key parameters that may have
influences on pre-processing. These parameters include the number of volumes, TR, and voxel
sizes

Step-by-Step Quality Assessment


SLICE TIMING CORRECTION
A suggested step of preprocessing, when individual slices are recorded and especially for eventrelated design protocols, is the proper treatment of differences in scanning time. An imprecise specification of time risks to lead to suboptimal statistical analysis, especially in event-related designs



MOTION CORRECTION 
Head motion is the largest source of bias in fMRI studies. If the subject is moving during
imaging, the images will look blurry and less defined.

All major fMRI analysis packages (as FSL) produce line plots allowing the user visual inspection of how translation and rotation parameters change from volume to volume (thus in time!).

TEMPORAL FILTERING 
The removal of baseline (low frequency drifts) is known as detrending. It may be performed
using high-pass filtering or using time-domain averaging methods.

High-frequency signal fluctuations
(usually identified as noise) can be removed by low-pass filtering not recommended for most studies, since it may compromise estimation of hemodynamic response functions and the signals of interest.

SPATIAL SMOOTHING
Spatial smoothing is the replacing of the signal at each voxel with a weighted average of
signals from adjacent voxels. This process can be justified by the fact that adjacent brain voxels are usually inherently correlated in their function (and thus in blood supply

In practice, the full width half maximum (FWHM) value of the Gaussian spatial filter is
typically set to about 4-6 mm for single subject studies and to about 6-8 mm for multisubject analyses. 

REGISTRATION

to ensure that each voxel for each subject corresponds to the same part of the
brain (co-registering and normalizing the images).
It is possible to do this by
normalizing to a template

To normalize (or warp) the images to a template, an affine transformation can be performed.

If the anatomical image is normalized to a template and the related transformations are saved, the
same transformations can be applied the functional images, assuming they are aligned. The
alignment of the functional and anatomical images is called co-registration.
Once the best match has been found, then the same transformations that were used to warp
the anatomical image to the template are applied to the functional images


